---
layout: post
title:  "Where Should I Keep My Constants in Kotlin?"
date:   2017-06-14 00:00:00 -0400
tags: [kotlin]
---
There has recently been a discussion online about the best approach for storing global constants, or 
`public static final` fields in Javaspeak. This short article describes available options and points 
out some of the pitfalls you can run into. But before we start, let's talk a bit about decompiling 
Kotlin code.

## Decompiling Kotlin

If you've used Kotlin for some time you should've noticed that the language is a wonderful 
boilerplate reduction tool. Kotlin makes it easy to express complex things with simple code, with 
compiler doing the dirty work. A great example is the `data class` feature, which allows you to 
easily substitute tens of lines of Java code with just a single line of Kotlin. However, as we all 
know, with great power comes great responsibility. It's not hard to make Kotlin compiler produce 
suboptimal bytecode, and, especially if you're doing Kotlin for Android, you have to be aware of the 
number of classes, methods and object allocations that your code will produce. Luckily, JetBrains 
has us covered with a decompiler tool integrated into Android Studio (and IntelliJ IDEA of course), 
that helps examine the bytecode, and even produces similar Java code. The latter makes it easy to 
optimize Kotlin.

There's a number of great resources online on the topic of decompiling Kotlin, so I won't go into 
much detail here and will just share some links:

- ["Zero boilerplate delegation in Kotlin"][zero-boilerplate] by [Piotr Ślesarew][piotr-slesarew] 
  provides a detailed explanation on how to use the decompiler tool
- "Kotlin: Uncovered", both the [Droidcon Boston talk][kotlin-uncovered-slides] and the 
  [series of articles][kotlin-uncovered-series], by [Victoria Gonda][victoria-gonda], goes into 
  great detail about decompiling Kotlin
- ["Exploring Kotlin's hidden costs"][kotlin-hidden-costs] series by [Christophe B.][christophe-b] 
  is a great compilation of things to be aware of when working with Kotlin

Let's now jump straight to the main topic: the constants.

## Constants in Kotlin

### Companion objects

There's no `static` keyword in Kotlin. If you want static access to certain fields or methods of 
your class, you should put them under a `companion object`. A naive way to declare a constant would 
look like this:

```kotlin
class Constants {
  companion object {
    val FOO = "foo"
  }
}
```

The field will be available globally and accessible through `Constants.FOO`. But let's now use the 
decompiler and see how this code would look if written in Java (simplified variant):

```java
public final class Constants {
   @NotNull
   private static final String FOO = "foo";
   public static final Constants.Companion Companion = new Constants.Companion((DefaultConstructorMarker)null);

   public static final class Companion {
      @NotNull
      public final String getFOO() {
         return Constants.FOO;
      }

      private Companion() {
      }

      // $FF: synthetic method
      public Companion(DefaultConstructorMarker $constructor_marker) {
         this();
      }
   }
}
```

It's important to note here that a companion object is an actual object: Kotlin's `Constants.FOO` 
call will translate into Java's `Constants.Companion.getFOO()`. This version is pretty bad, as it 
introduces an object and a method that could've been avoided.

### const vals

A simple way to improve our example is to mark `FOO` as `const`:

```kotlin
class Constants {
  companion object {
    const val FOO = "foo"
  }
}
```

Here's the Java version:

```java
public final class Constants {
   @NotNull
   public static final String FOO = "foo";
   public static final Constants.Companion Companion = new Constants.Companion((DefaultConstructorMarker)null);

   public static final class Companion {
      private Companion() {
      }

      // $FF: synthetic method
      public Companion(DefaultConstructorMarker $constructor_marker) {
         this();
      }
   }
}
```

The getter is gone, and we actually have direct static access to the field now, but we still have a 
useless companion object generated by the compiler. Another thing to note about `const` is that it 
only works with primitives and Strings:

```kotlin
class Constants {
  companion object {
    // won't compile
    const val FOO = Foo()
  }
}
```

A workaround is to use the `@JvmField` annotation on the `val`:

```kotlin
class Constants {
  companion object {
    @JvmField val FOO = Foo()
  }
}
```

This will make the `Foo` instance `public static final`. There's an important difference between the 
behavior of `const` and `@JvmField`: accesses to a `const val` get inlined by the compiler, while 
`@JvmField`s don't. Let's take the following code:

```kotlin
fun main(args: Array<String>) {
  println(Constants.FOO)
}
```

Here's what we get with `@JvmField val FOO = Foo()`:

```java
public final class MainKt {
   public static final void main(@NotNull String[] args) {
      Intrinsics.checkParameterIsNotNull(args, "args");
      Foo var1 = Constants.FOO;
      System.out.println(var1);
   }
}
```

and with `const val FOO = "foo"`:

```java
public final class MainKt {
   public static final void main(@NotNull String[] args) {
      Intrinsics.checkParameterIsNotNull(args, "args");
      String var1 = "foo";
      System.out.println(var1);
   }
}
```

There's no call to `Constants.FOO` in the second example, the value has been inlined.

### Dropping the class and the object

If all we need is just a set of constants - we can safely drop both the class and the object and use 
top-level `val`s:

```kotlin
const val FOO = "foo"
```

The result is exactly as you would've written it in Java:

```java
public final class ConstantsKt {
   @NotNull
   public static final String FOO = "foo";
}
```

In Kotlin, you'll be accessing the value by its name globally. If you're using the value in Java 
code, you'll call `ConstantsKt.FOO`. To avoid `Kt` suffixes on class names, use the `file:@JvmName` 
annotation on top of the file to specify a more readable name:

```kotlin
@file:JvmName("Constants")
```

Compiler will use provided value for the class name:

```java
public final class Constants {
   @NotNull
   public static final String FOO = "foo";
}
```

## Conclusion

Even though there's no `static` keyword in Kotlin, it's easy to define constants that are globally 
accessible. It's also quite easy to get this wrong and introduce redundant methods and object
allocations into the bytecode. The decompiler tool can help you locate and fix this kind of issues, 
and comes with an additional benefit - you'll quickly learn how all that Kotlin magic works under 
the hood! Have fun!

[zero-boilerplate]: https://medium.com/@piotr.slesarew/zero-boilerplate-delegation-in-kotlin-e383fdef28eb
[piotr-slesarew]: https://twitter.com/SliskiCode
[kotlin-uncovered-slides]: https://slideslive.com/38900603/kotlin-uncovered
[kotlin-uncovered-series]: https://collectiveidea.com/blog/archives/2017/05/16/kotlin-uncovered-part-1
[victoria-gonda]: https://twitter.com/TTGonda
[kotlin-hidden-costs]: https://medium.com/@BladeCoder/exploring-kotlins-hidden-costs-part-1-fbb9935d9b62
[christophe-b]: https://twitter.com/BladeCoder
